Problem Statement Explanation
Automated Detection of Thoracic Pathologies from Chest X-ray Images
1. Introduction
Chest X-ray imaging is one of the most widely used diagnostic tools in medical practice for detecting diseases related to the thoracic region such as lung infections, fluid accumulation, or structural abnormalities of the heart and lungs. However, manual analysis of X-ray images by radiologists can be time-consuming and prone to variability due to human factors.
In this assignment, the objective is to design and implement an automated deep learning system capable of detecting thoracic diseases from chest X-ray images. The task is formulated as a multi-class classification problem, where each X-ray image must be assigned to one of 20 possible pathology classes.
The system should learn patterns in medical imaging data and predict the most likely pathology class associated with the image.
This problem is particularly challenging because it involves medical data, class imbalance, and asymmetric misclassification costs, meaning that different types of prediction errors have different levels of severity.
________________________________________
2. Problem Objective
The goal of this assignment is to build a machine learning or deep learning model that can:
1.	Analyze chest X-ray images
2.	Identify the most probable thoracic pathology
3.	Assign the image to one of the 20 predefined classes
This task is formulated as a multi-class classification problem, where each input image belongs to exactly one pathology class.
The possible classes include various thoracic conditions such as:

Atelectasis
Cardiomegaly
Consolidation
Edema
Effusion
Emphysema
Fibrosis
Hernia
Infiltration
Mass
Nodule
Pleural_Thickening
Pneumonia
Pneumothorax
Pneumoperitoneum
Pneumomediastinum
Subcutaneous Emphysema
Tortuous Aorta
Calcification of the Aorta
No Finding

The No Finding class represents cases where no abnormality is present in the X-ray.
3. Key Challenges in the Dataset
3.1 Class Imbalance
Medical datasets often suffer from class imbalance, meaning that some diseases appear very frequently while others appear only rarely.
For example:
Type	Frequency
Common conditions	Many examples
Rare diseases	Very few examples
This creates a challenge because machine learning models tend to become biased toward majority classes, especially the No Finding class.
If the model simply predicts the majority class most of the time, it may achieve high accuracy but perform poorly in detecting rare diseases.
Therefore, special techniques may be required such as:
●	Class weighting
●	Oversampling rare classes
●	Focal loss
●	Balanced batch sampling
3.2 Asymmetric Misclassification Costs
Unlike many typical machine learning tasks, not all prediction errors are equally harmful in medical diagnosis.
In healthcare applications:
●	Missing a disease (False Negative) can have serious consequences.
●	Raising a false alarm (False Positive) is less harmful but still undesirable.
Therefore, the scoring system heavily penalizes False Negatives.
3.3 Cost Interpretation

Prediction Outcome	Meaning	Score
True Positive(TP)	Correctly detecting a disease 	+1
False Positive(FP)	Predicting disease when its not present	-1
False Negative(FN)	Missing the disease	-5

This scoring mechanism strongly encourages models to avoid missing diseases.
4. Special Cases in Prediction
Because No Finding is also treated as a class, certain prediction cases require special interpretation.
Case 1: Correctly Predicting No Finding
If the model predicts No Finding and the patient truly has no disease:
Score = +1
Case 2: Predicting No Finding when Disease Exists
If the model predicts No Finding but the patient actually has a disease:
This counts as a False Negative for the disease.
Score = -5
This is a highly penalized mistake because the disease was completely missed.
Case 3: Predicting Disease when it Should be No Finding
If the model predicts a disease but the patient has No Finding:
This is considered a False Positive.
Score = -1
This represents an unnecessary medical alarm.
Case 4: Confusing One Disease with Another
If the true disease is Disease A but the model predicts Disease B:
Two errors occur simultaneously:
●	False Negative for Disease A → -5
●	False Positive for Disease B → -1
Total penalty: -6 points
This reflects a serious diagnostic mistake.
5. Evaluation Metric
The competition uses a macro-averaged asymmetric cost function. So you may get scores such as -4.xxxxx or -5.xxxxx 
The score for each class is computed as:
 
Where:
●	(TP_c) = True positives for class (c)
●	(FP_c) = False positives for class (c)
●	(FN_c) = False negatives for class (c)
●	(N_c) = Number of true samples for class (c)
5.1 Final Competition Score
The final score is obtained by averaging the scores across all classes:
 
●	(C = 20) 
Why Macro Averaging is Important
Macro averaging ensures that each class contributes equally to the final score.
This prevents models from maximizing performance simply by predicting the majority class (No Finding).
Instead, models must also perform well on rare diseases, which is critical in medical diagnosis.
6. Dataset Description
The dataset used in this assignment contains chest X-ray images labeled with thoracic pathologies.
Number of Classes: There are 20 classes
Training Dataset

Property	Value
Number of images	51,043
Labels available 	Yes
Purpose	Model training and validation
Each image has a corresponding label indicating the presence of one pathology.
Test Dataset

Property	Value
Number of images	17,015
Labels available	No
Purpose	Kaggle evaluation

Students must generate predictions for these images as shown in below format
Label Format: Labels are provided in one-hot encoded format.
Example:
id,Atelectasis,Cardiomegaly,............,Calcification of the Aorta,No Finding
09285150fc1d4e1db86891eb1a561841.png,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0
09285150fc1d4e1db86891eb1a561841.png,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0
09285150fc1d4e1db86891eb1a561841.png,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0

This means the image belongs to exactly one class.
File Structure: The dataset is organized as follows:
dataset/
│
├── images/
 │     img_0001.png
 │     img_0002.png
 │     ...
 │
├── train.csv
├── sample_submission.csv

Train.csv contains:
●	image id
●	20 binary columns corresponding to the pathology classes.
7. Kaggle Competition Structure
This assignment includes a Kaggle competition component.
Students must submit their model predictions to Kaggle to evaluate performance.
Make sure to name the kaggle notebook as rollNumber-notebook-26T1 , below is one such example: 
21f1006236-notebook-26T1
After creating kaggle notebook, share it with username avinashsingh913  meaning add avinashsingh913 as collaborator and provide edit access while sharing.
Your team name has to be your roll number, if it’s not your roll number, you wont be able to get marks for your kaggle score.

8. Leaderboard System

Kaggle uses two types of leaderboards.

Public Leaderboard
During the competition:
●	Your submission is evaluated on 65% of the test set.
●	The score appears on the public leaderboard.
●	This helps teams compare their progress with others.
Private Leaderboard
After the competition ends:
●	The remaining 35% of the test set is used.
●	The final rankings are based on this hidden evaluation.
This prevents teams from overfitting to the public leaderboard.
9. Submission Format
Students must submit a CSV file named: submission.csv
The format must match sample_submission.csv provided in kaggle.
Important constraints:
●	Each row must contain exactly one "1".
●	All other class columns must contain 0.
Model Development Strategies 
Students must design and train a model capable of detecting thoracic pathologies.
Key requirements include:
Handling Class Imbalance
Possible strategies:
●	Weighted loss functions
●	Oversampling rare classes
●	Data augmentation
●	Focal loss
Optimizing for Competition Metric
Because False Negatives are heavily penalized, models should focus on:
●	Maximizing True Positives
●	Minimizing False Negatives

